The concept of identity seems to be all the rage now in the social
sciences. A critical focus of process oriented scholarship concerns
why and how the social groups to which we belong whether ethnic,
national, or transnational influence the knowledge, interpretations,
beliefs, preferences, and strategies, that underlie both our
individual and collective behavior. In addition, it appears that
scholars have come to recognize that much discourse by actors is,
broadly speaking, identity discourse; that is, actors use particular
adjectives that describe the self and others in order to achieve
goals, and these articulated self descriptions also serve as
motivations for behavior.

It is accurate to say, however, that there is not much consensus on
how to define identity; nor is there consistency in the procedures
used for determining the content and scope of identity; nor is there
agreement on where to look for evidence that identity indeed affects
knowledge, interpretations, beliefs, preferences, and strategies; nor
is there agreement on how identity affects these components of
action. At its simplest, the problem is that in social science there
is no consensus on how to treat identity as a variable. Not that we
should fetishize consensus but its absence reflects the dearth of work
on some basic questions about how to conceptualize and study
identity. We prefer to put the problem this way: If identity is a key
independent variable explaining political, economic, and social
behavior, how does it vary, why does it vary, and how would one know
variation if one saw it?

The aim of this project is to develop conceptualizations of identity
and, more importantly, to develop technologies for observing identity
and identity change that will have application in the social
sciences. Heretofore the usual techniques for analyzing identity have
consisted of hard-to-replicate discourse analysis or lengthy
individual interviews, at one extreme, or the use of large-N surveys
at the other. Yet, much social science research relies on historical
and contemporaneous texts. We hope to develop computer-aided
quantitative and qualitative methods for analyzing a large number of
textual sources in order to determine the content, intensity, and
contestation of individual and collective identities at any particular
point in time and space. These methods will add to the portfolio of
existing methods. It will allow researchers to approach identity
research with a wider range of tools, including more rigorous and
replicable methods of analyzing identity as an independent (and
dependent) variable.
